readme.md, before:


# 🌑 TinyShade

A minimalist, zero-boilerplate **WebGPU** framework designed for rapid prototyping of compute-driven visuals, simulations, and multi-pass post-process effects.

TinyShade simplifies the complex WebGPU binding model into a chainable API. It handles **Ping-Ponging** (feedback textures), **Dynamic Compute Dispatching**, and **Uniform Management** automatically.

## 📦 Installation
Get up and running with the TinyShade development environment in seconds.

### 1. Clone & Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MagnusThor/TinyShade.git
cd TinyShade
npm install

```
### 2. Start Development
Launch the dev server with Hot Module Replacement (HMR).
Bash

```bash
npm start
```


## 🚀 Quick Start: The Stack

This example demonstrates the power of the full chain: loading external textures, sharing common math, running a compute simulation named "fluid", and rendering a final lit scene.


```ts
import { TinyShade } from "./TinyShade";

const start = async () => {
    const app = await TinyShade.create("canvas");

    (await app
        // 1. Load assets once; accessible by name in all shader stages
        .addTexture("matcap", "./textures/gold_matcap.jpg")
        
        // 2. Inject shared math automatically
        .addCommon(`
            fn sdfSphere(p: vec3f, s: f32) -> f32 { return length(p) - s; }
        `)
        
        // 3. Compute Pass: Output is accessible in later stages as 'fluid'
        .addCompute("fluid", `
            fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
                textureStore(outTex, id.xy, vec4f(u.time % 1.0)); 
            }
        `)
        
        // 4. Main Pass: Final rendering using 'matcap' and 'fluid' textures
        .main(`
            @fragment fn main(in: VSOut) -> @location(0) vec4f {
                let simData = textureSample(fluid, samp, in.uv).r;
                let lit = textureSample(matcap, samp, in.uv).rgb * simData;
                return vec4f(lit, 1.0);
            }
        `)
    ).run();
};

start();

```


## 📜 Shader Variables Reference

| Variable Type | Source | Description |
|--------------|--------|-------------|
| `<name>` | any | setUniformsAccess any custom uniform defined in JS. |
| `<name>` | texture_2d | addCompute The output texture of a named compute pass. |
| `<name>_data` | array<u32> | addAtomicCompute The raw atomic buffer of a named atomic pass. |
| `prev_<name>` | texture_2d | addPass The previous frame (feedback) of a named fragment pass. |
| `outTex` | texture_storage | Internal The write-only target inside the active compute pass. |
| `data` | atomic<u32> | addAtomicCompute Read/Write atomic buffer (active only within its own pass). |
| `samp` | sampler | Internal A linear, filtering sampler ready to use globally. |
| `data` | array<f32> | addCompute Storage buffer (active only if size > 0). |



## 🧠 High-Level Pipeline Overview

TinyShade is built around a **simple, linear execution model**:

> **Data flows forward through a named chain of GPU passes — and each pass remembers its own past.**

### The Named Execution Flow

Every frame, TinyShade executes your pipeline **exactly in the order you write it**. Because you name your passes, your shaders read like logic rather than indices:

```lua
Uniforms ↓ "blur" (Compute) ↓ "bloom" (Fragment) ↓ main() → Canvas 

```

-   Each stage can **see the output of every stage before it** using the assigned name.
    
-   Fragment passes also see **their own previous frame** by prefixing the name with `prev_`.
    

### Temporal Feedback Is Built-In

Every fragment pass automatically creates a "ping-pong" pair. If you name a pass `"feedback"`, TinyShade provides:

-   `feedback` → The texture you are writing to this frame.
    
-   `prev_feedback` → The texture as it looked in the previous frame.
    

This makes effects like trails, accumulation, and cellular automata **natural and effortless**.


## ⬛ Core API: Step-by-Step

API Doumentation can be found here - [TinyShade documentation](https://magnusthor.github.io/TinyShade/public/doc/)

### 1. Initialize

Sets up the GPU context, detects hardware workgroup limits, and configures the canvas.

TypeScript

```
const app = await TinyShade.create("canvas-id");
```

### 2. Compute Engine (`addCompute`)

-   **1D Simulation (`size > 0`):** Perfect for particles. Provides the `data` buffer.
    
-   **2D Generative (`size = 0`):** Dispatches across the screen resolution.
    


```rust
app.addCompute("particles", `
    ##WORKGROUP_SIZE
    fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
        data[id.x] += 0.01; 
        textureStore(outTex, id.xy, vec4f(1.0));
    }
`);

```

### 3. Atomic Scattering (`addAtomicCompute`)

This specialized pass is designed for **Many-to-One** operations where multiple threads need to write to the same memory address safely (e.g., projection, heatmaps, splatting).

```rust
app.addAtomicCompute("heatmap", `
    ##WORKGROUP_SIZE
    fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
        let i = id.x;
        let pos = physics_data[i]; // Reading from a previous pass
        let coords = project_to_screen(pos);
        
        // Safely increment a pixel's energy value
        atomicAdd(&data[coords.y * width + coords.x], 1u);
    }
`, PIXEL_COUNT);

```

> **When to use `addAtomicCompute`?**
> -   **YES:** For "Splatting" (projecting 3D particles onto a 2D grid), creating density heatmaps, or histogram generation.
> -   **NO:** For standard image processing or SDF rendering. Atomics introduce serialization overhead; only use them when thread collisions are a mathematical requirement.    


_Note: `##WORKGROUP_SIZE` is replaced with hardware-optimized settings like `@workgroup_size(16, 16, 1)`._

### 4. Multi-Pass Fragment (`addPass`)

Add sequential post-processing. Each `addPass` defines a texture name for subsequent shaders.


```rust
app.addPass("blur", `
    @fragment fn main(in: VSOut) -> @location(0) vec4f {
        let current = textureSample(baseLayer, samp, in.uv);
        let history = textureSample(prev_blur, samp, in.uv); // Automatic feedback!
        return mix(current, history, 0.9);
    }
`);

```


## 🎹 Audio Integration (`addAudio`)

TinyShade supports sample-accurate timing. By implementing `IAudioPlugin`, an engine (like `GPUSynth`) can drive the `u.time` uniform.


```ts
app.addAudio(mySynth) // u.time is now driven by the audio clock
   .run();

```

### 🖥️🎶 GPU Music from PCrush

My dear friend PCrush (Peter C) and co-developer of GPUSynth created several example tracks for GPUSynth. These can be found in the following folder:

[src/example/music/PCrushSongs/](src/example/music/PCrushSongs/)


>Note: PCrush forked my old repository
>https://github.com/MagnusThor/demolishedAudio
>and significantly improved it, modernizing the codebase and adapting it toward a more WebGPU / WGSL–style architecture.

## Various Examples on TinyShade



You can try the live examples here:  
[TinyShade Examples](https://magnusthor.github.io/TinyShade/public/)

>⚠️ **Note:** TinyShade is under active development. APIs, visuals, and performance characteristics may change.

The source code for each example can be found in:

[/src/example/](src/example/)

```python  
Each example is self-contained and intended to demonstrate a specific feature or rendering technique.
```


## ⚡ Technical Architecture

-   **Atomic Pass Orchestration**: TinyShade treats the GPU as a sequential state machine. It handles the heavy lifting of `CommandEncoder` management and `Compute-to-Render` synchronization, ensuring zero-latency data handover between simulation and visualization stages.
    
-   **Recursive Temporal Buffer Management**: Implements a sophisticated "Ping-Pong" texture strategy. By maintaining dual-buffer states for every fragment pass, the engine enables $O(1)$ access to historical frame data (`prev_name`), turning linear shaders into recursive feedback systems.
    
-   **Adaptive Dispatch Heuristics**: Rather than using naive thread counts, the engine queries hardware limits to calculate the **Optimal Workgroup Topology**. It aligns dispatch grids with the GPU's internal SIMD width, maximizing occupancy and throughput across varying architectures.
    
-   **Sample-Locked Synchronization**: By hijacking the uniform update loop with `IAudioPlugin`, the engine achieves sample-accurate phase alignment between visuals and audio. This eliminates the "clock drift" common in `requestAnimationFrame` and ensures every pixel update is chronologically locked to the audio sample clock.
    
-   **Procedural Geometry Injection**: Utilizes a "Vertex-less" rendering technique. By generating Clip Space coordinates directly from `@builtin(vertex_index)`, it bypasses the entire Input Assembler stage, reducing memory bandwidth overhead and eliminating the need for CPU-side vertex buffers.
    

----------

### 🚀 Developer Tip: Avoiding Name Collisions

Since we now use dynamic naming, it’s important to remember that your pass names become **global identifiers** in WGSL.

> **Rule of Thumb:** Avoid naming your passes after WGSL reserved words (like `texture`, `var`, `fn`, `array`) or your own `addCommon` function names. A name like `fluid_sim` is always safer and more readable than just `fluid`.



## 🧁 TinyShadeBake — Scene Serialization & Distribution

**TinyShadeBake** is TinyShade’s _export and packaging layer_.  
It captures a live `TinyShade` application and converts it into portable artifacts that can be shared, archived, or deployed without the original source code.

At a high level, **Bake turns a running TinyShadeFlow into data**.

### What It Does

-   **Freezes the shader graph**
    
    -   Pass order
    -   WGSL source (fully assembled & minified)
    -   Uniform layout
    -   Textures (base64-encoded)
    -   Canvas size & workgroup configuration
        
-   **Exports in two formats**
    
    -   **Graph JSON** — for inspection, tooling, or custom loaders     
    -   **Self-contained HTML demo** — zero external dependencies
        

### Self-Contained HTML Mode (Demoscene-Style)

In its most powerful mode, TinyShadeBake:

-   Packs the entire application runtime into a **compressed PNG**
-   Embeds the PNG into a minimal HTML file
-   Decodes and executes the payload at runtime via an `<img onload>` handler

This enables:

-   Single-file demos
-   Offline playback
-   CDN-friendly deployment
-   Deterministic builds

> The PNG is a _data container_, not a visual asset.

### Baking a Scene (Code Example)

Once your TinyShade scene is complete, baking it into a distributable artifact is a **single call**.

#### Default Runner 

```ts
import { TinyShadeBake } from "./TinyShadeBake";

// Exports a fully self-contained HTML demo
await TinyShadeBake.downloadSelfContained(
    app,
    "release_demo.html"
);

```

This produces:

-   One `.html` file
    
-   No external assets
    
-   No runtime dependencies
    
-   Ready-to-share output
    

#### Custom Runner Injection

For advanced use cases (instrumentation, alternate timing, profiling, future audio sync), you may inject a **custom TinyShadeRunner implementation**.

```ts
import { TinyShadeBake } from "./TinyShadeBake";
import { TinyShadeRunner } from "./TinyShadeRunner";

// Stringify a custom runner implementation
const customRunnerSource = TinyShadeRunner.toString();

await TinyShadeBake.downloadSelfContained(
    app,
    "release_demo.html",
    customRunnerSource
);

```

> The runner source is embedded directly into the baked payload and instantiated at runtime.  
> This allows **full control over execution** while keeping the original scene untouched.


## 🏃 TinyShadeRunner — Runtime Scene Executor

**TinyShadeRunner** is the **minimal WebGPU runtime** responsible for executing a baked TinyShade scene.

It does **not** construct shader graphs —  
it _replays_ them.

At a high level, **Runner turns data back into execution**.

### Execution Model

Every frame:

```text
Uniform Update
↓
Compute Passes (in order)
↓
Fragment Passes (with feedback)
↓
Main Pass → Canvas` 
```
No branching.  
No scheduling logic.  
No graph evaluation.

The runner assumes the graph is **already correct**.

### Key Design Goals

-   **Zero authoring complexity**
-   **Deterministic playback**
-   **Minimal runtime surface**
-   **No dependency on TinyShade itself**
- 
This separation allows TinyShade to remain a **creative tool**, while TinyShadeRunner becomes a **tiny, embeddable player**.

## 🔁 Bake + Run: The Complete Lifecycle

```text
`TinyShade (Authoring)
        ↓
TinyShadeBake (Freeze & Pack)
        ↓
TinyShadeRunner (Replay & Execute)` 
```
This split enables:

-   Live coding → frozen artifacts    
-   Large authoring API → tiny runtime    
-   Creative iteration → production delivery    

Audio support is intentionally omitted from the current runner, as synchronization strategies are **highly production-dependent** and will be introduced in a future release.

---




## 🥂 Special Thanks & Credits
TinyShade stands on the shoulders of giants in the creative coding community:

**Mårten Rånge**: Huge thanks for the "[Introduction to Path Tracers](https://github.com/MagnusThor/so-you-think-you-can-code-2025/blob/main/day08/readme.md)" article featured in the SYTYCC 2025 Advent Calendar. The logic for the path-tracing examples in this repo is ported directly from his masterful WGSL/WebGPU implementation.

**PCrush**: For the [GPUSynth architecture](https://github.com/MagnusThor/so-you-think-you-can-code-2025/blob/main/day04/readme.md). TinyShade’s audio integration and internal DSP logic are heavily inspired by and adapted from his work on GPU-based sound synthesis.

---    


That is an ambitious and logical next step. Moving from a **linear chain** to a **Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)** will allow for much higher performance, as independent passes (like two different post-process filters or parallel simulation steps) can be dispatched to the GPU simultaneously or packed into the same command buffer more efficiently.

Here is a proposed **"Planned Features"** section to include in your README.

---

That sounds like a perfect, intuitive "low-friction" design. By making the dependency implicit (all prior passes) but allow for explicit overrides with `.dependsOn()`, you provide the power of a full Graph without forcing the user to map every single edge for simple projects.

Here is the updated **Roadmap** section for the README, specifically detailing this logic.

---

## 🗺️ Roadmap: v2 Semi-Graph & Live-Editor Ecosystem
I'm  currently architecting the next evolution of TinyShade, moving from a linear execution chain to a **Programmatically Defined Semi-Graph**.

### 1. Parallel Pass Execution (The "Smart-DAG")

TinyShade v2 will treat your pipeline as a **Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)**. To keep the API minimalist, we follow a "Convention over Configuration" approach:

* **Implicit Dependency (The Default):** If you don't specify anything, a pass automatically depends on **all prior passes** in the chain. This maintains the current linear "Stack" behavior.
* **Explicit Dependency (`.dependsOn()`):** You can break the linear chain to create parallel branches.

```ts
// Example of Parallel Execution v2
const simA = app.addCompute("physics", shaderA);
const simB = app.addCompute("fluid", shaderB);

// simB does NOT wait for simA; they run in parallel on the GPU
simB.dependsOn([]); 

// Final pass waits for both parallel branches
app.main(mainShader).dependsOn([simA, simB]);

```

### 2. Why this matters for Performance

By defining independent branches, TinyShade can:

* **Merge Command Encoders:** Group parallel tasks into a single submission, significantly reducing CPU-to-GPU overhead.
* **Overlap Compute & Fragment:** If a fragment pass doesn't depend on a concurrent compute pass, the GPU can overlap their execution (Asynchronous Compute), filling more of the GPU's hardware units simultaneously.

### 3. 🛰️ TinyShade Satellite (Live-Editor Plugin)

A dedicated "Sidecar" application that hooks into the TinyShade Graph via HMR.

* **Live Node Editing:** Click any node in the graph (Compute, Fragment, or Atomic) and edit its WGSL code. The Satellite app hot-swaps the pipeline without losing the current GPU state.
* **Visual Debugging:** Tap into the graph to see a real-time preview of intermediate textures—perfect for debugging multi-pass "Atomic Splatting" or complex feedback loops.
* **State Locking:** Change logic while the simulation is running; the buffers and textures stay intact, allowing you to see the effect of your code changes on live data.

---

## ⚡ Technical Architecture ( as is )

* **Atomic Pass Orchestration:** Sequential state machine logic with zero-latency Compute-to-Render handover.
* **Recursive Temporal Buffers:** Automatic Ping-Ponging via `prev_<name>` injections.
* **Adaptive Dispatch:** Workgroup topology calculated based on hardware limits.
* **Sample-Locked Sync:** `IAudioPlugin` support for phase-perfect GPU Music.
* **Vertex-less Geometry:** Triangle-index math for full-screen rendering without vertex buffers.

---

*Magnus Thor - December 2025*

Commit message:

updates bundle + wgsl-minify fixes + docs updated

readme.md, after:


# 🌑 TinyShade

A minimalist, zero-boilerplate **WebGPU** framework designed for rapid prototyping of compute-driven visuals, simulations, and multi-pass post-process effects.

TinyShade simplifies the complex WebGPU binding model into a chainable API. It handles **Ping-Ponging** (feedback textures), **Dynamic Compute Dispatching**, and **Uniform Management** automatically.

## 📦 Installation
Get up and running with the TinyShade development environment in seconds.

### 1. Clone & Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MagnusThor/TinyShade.git
cd TinyShade
npm install

```
### 2. Start Development
Launch the dev server with Hot Module Replacement (HMR).
Bash

```bash
npm start
```


## 🚀 Quick Start: The Stack

This example demonstrates the power of the full chain: loading external textures, sharing common math, running a compute simulation named "fluid", and rendering a final lit scene.


```ts
import { TinyShade } from "./TinyShade";

const start = async () => {
    const app = await TinyShade.create("canvas");

    (await app
        // 1. Load assets once; accessible by name in all shader stages
        .addTexture("matcap", "./textures/gold_matcap.jpg")
        
        // 2. Inject shared math automatically
        .addCommon(`
            fn sdfSphere(p: vec3f, s: f32) -> f32 { return length(p) - s; }
        `)
        
        // 3. Compute Pass: Output is accessible in later stages as 'fluid'
        .addCompute("fluid", `
            fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
                textureStore(outTex, id.xy, vec4f(u.time % 1.0)); 
            }
        `)
        
        // 4. Main Pass: Final rendering using 'matcap' and 'fluid' textures
        .main(`
            @fragment fn main(in: VSOut) -> @location(0) vec4f {
                let simData = textureSample(fluid, samp, in.uv).r;
                let lit = textureSample(matcap, samp, in.uv).rgb * simData;
                return vec4f(lit, 1.0);
            }
        `)
    ).run();
};

start();

```


## 📜 Shader Variables Reference

| Variable Type | Source | Description |
|--------------|--------|-------------|
| `<name>` | any | setUniformsAccess any custom uniform defined in JS. |
| `<name>` | texture_2d | addCompute The output texture of a named compute pass. |
| `<name>_data` | array<u32> | addAtomicCompute The raw atomic buffer of a named atomic pass. |
| `prev_<name>` | texture_2d | addPass The previous frame (feedback) of a named fragment pass. |
| `outTex` | texture_storage | Internal The write-only target inside the active compute pass. |
| `data` | atomic<u32> | addAtomicCompute Read/Write atomic buffer (active only within its own pass). |
| `samp` | sampler | Internal A linear, filtering sampler ready to use globally. |
| `data` | array<f32> | addCompute Storage buffer (active only if size > 0). |



## 🧠 High-Level Pipeline Overview

TinyShade is built around a **simple, linear execution model**:

> **Data flows forward through a named chain of GPU passes — and each pass remembers its own past.**

### The Named Execution Flow

Every frame, TinyShade executes your pipeline **exactly in the order you write it**. Because you name your passes, your shaders read like logic rather than indices:

```lua
Uniforms ↓ "blur" (Compute) ↓ "bloom" (Fragment) ↓ main() → Canvas 

```

-   Each stage can **see the output of every stage before it** using the assigned name.
    
-   Fragment passes also see **their own previous frame** by prefixing the name with `prev_`.
    

### Temporal Feedback Is Built-In

Every fragment pass automatically creates a "ping-pong" pair. If you name a pass `"feedback"`, TinyShade provides:

-   `feedback` → The texture you are writing to this frame.
    
-   `prev_feedback` → The texture as it looked in the previous frame.
    

This makes effects like trails, accumulation, and cellular automata **natural and effortless**.


## ⬛ Core API: Step-by-Step

API Doumentation can be found here - [TinyShade documentation](https://magnusthor.github.io/TinyShade/public/doc/)

### 1. Initialize

Sets up the GPU context, detects hardware workgroup limits, and configures the canvas.

TypeScript

```
const app = await TinyShade.create("canvas-id");
```

### 2. Compute Engine (`addCompute`)

-   **1D Simulation (`size > 0`):** Perfect for particles. Provides the `data` buffer.
    
-   **2D Generative (`size = 0`):** Dispatches across the screen resolution.
    


```rust
app.addCompute("particles", `
    ##WORKGROUP_SIZE
    fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
        data[id.x] += 0.01; 
        textureStore(outTex, id.xy, vec4f(1.0));
    }
`);

```

### 3. Atomic Scattering (`addAtomicCompute`)

This specialized pass is designed for **Many-to-One** operations where multiple threads need to write to the same memory address safely (e.g., projection, heatmaps, splatting).

```rust
app.addAtomicCompute("heatmap", `
    ##WORKGROUP_SIZE
    fn main(@builtin(global_invocation_id) id: vec3u) {
        let i = id.x;
        let pos = physics_data[i]; // Reading from a previous pass
        let coords = project_to_screen(pos);
        
        // Safely increment a pixel's energy value
        atomicAdd(&data[coords.y * width + coords.x], 1u);
    }
`, PIXEL_COUNT);

```

> **When to use `addAtomicCompute`?**
> -   **YES:** For "Splatting" (projecting 3D particles onto a 2D grid), creating density heatmaps, or histogram generation.
> -   **NO:** For standard image processing or SDF rendering. Atomics introduce serialization overhead; only use them when thread collisions are a mathematical requirement.    


_Note: `##WORKGROUP_SIZE` is replaced with hardware-optimized settings like `@workgroup_size(16, 16, 1)`._

### 4. Multi-Pass Fragment (`addPass`)

Add sequential post-processing. Each `addPass` defines a texture name for subsequent shaders.


```rust
app.addPass("blur", `
    @fragment fn main(in: VSOut) -> @location(0) vec4f {
        let current = textureSample(baseLayer, samp, in.uv);
        let history = textureSample(prev_blur, samp, in.uv); // Automatic feedback!
        return mix(current, history, 0.9);
    }
`);

```


## 🎹 Audio Integration (`addAudio`)

TinyShade supports sample-accurate timing. By implementing `IAudioPlugin`, an engine (like `GPUSynth`) can drive the `u.time` uniform.


```ts
app.addAudio(mySynth) // u.time is now driven by the audio clock
   .run();

```

### 🖥️🎶 GPU Music from PCrush

My dear friend PCrush (Peter C) and co-developer of GPUSynth created several example tracks for GPUSynth. These can be found in the following folder:

[src/example/music/PCrushSongs/](src/example/music/PCrushSongs/)


>Note: PCrush forked my old repository
>https://github.com/MagnusThor/demolishedAudio
>and significantly improved it, modernizing the codebase and adapting it toward a more WebGPU / WGSL–style architecture.

## Various Examples on TinyShade



You can try the live examples here:  
[TinyShade Examples](https://magnusthor.github.io/TinyShade/public/)

>⚠️ **Note:** TinyShade is under active development. APIs, visuals, and performance characteristics may change.

The source code for each example can be found in:

[/src/example/](src/example/)

```python  
Each example is self-contained and intended to demonstrate a specific feature or rendering technique.
```


## ⚡ Technical Architecture

-   **Atomic Pass Orchestration**: TinyShade treats the GPU as a sequential state machine. It handles the heavy lifting of `CommandEncoder` management and `Compute-to-Render` synchronization, ensuring zero-latency data handover between simulation and visualization stages.
    
-   **Recursive Temporal Buffer Management**: Implements a sophisticated "Ping-Pong" texture strategy. By maintaining dual-buffer states for every fragment pass, the engine enables $O(1)$ access to historical frame data (`prev_name`), turning linear shaders into recursive feedback systems.
    
-   **Adaptive Dispatch Heuristics**: Rather than using naive thread counts, the engine queries hardware limits to calculate the **Optimal Workgroup Topology**. It aligns dispatch grids with the GPU's internal SIMD width, maximizing occupancy and throughput across varying architectures.
    
-   **Sample-Locked Synchronization**: By hijacking the uniform update loop with `IAudioPlugin`, the engine achieves sample-accurate phase alignment between visuals and audio. This eliminates the "clock drift" common in `requestAnimationFrame` and ensures every pixel update is chronologically locked to the audio sample clock.
    
-   **Procedural Geometry Injection**: Utilizes a "Vertex-less" rendering technique. By generating Clip Space coordinates directly from `@builtin(vertex_index)`, it bypasses the entire Input Assembler stage, reducing memory bandwidth overhead and eliminating the need for CPU-side vertex buffers.
    

----------

### 🚀 Developer Tip: Avoiding Name Collisions

Since we now use dynamic naming, it’s important to remember that your pass names become **global identifiers** in WGSL.

> **Rule of Thumb:** Avoid naming your passes after WGSL reserved words (like `texture`, `var`, `fn`, `array`) or your own `addCommon` function names. A name like `fluid_sim` is always safer and more readable than just `fluid`.



## 🧁 TinyShadeBake — Scene Serialization & Distribution

**TinyShadeBake** is TinyShade’s _export and packaging layer_.  
It captures a live `TinyShade` application and converts it into portable artifacts that can be shared, archived, or deployed without the original source code.

At a high level, **Bake turns a running TinyShadeFlow into data**.

### What It Does

-   **Freezes the shader graph**
    
    -   Pass order
    -   WGSL source (fully assembled & minified)
    -   Uniform layout
    -   Textures (base64-encoded)
    -   Canvas size & workgroup configuration
        
-   **Exports in two formats**
    
    -   **Graph JSON** — for inspection, tooling, or custom loaders     
    -   **Self-contained HTML demo** — zero external dependencies
        

### Self-Contained HTML Mode (Demoscene-Style)

In its most powerful mode, TinyShadeBake:

-   Packs the entire application runtime into a **compressed PNG**
-   Embeds the PNG into a minimal HTML file
-   Decodes and executes the payload at runtime via an `<img onload>` handler

This enables:

-   Single-file demos
-   Offline playback
-   CDN-friendly deployment
-   Deterministic builds

> The PNG is a _data container_, not a visual asset.

### Baking a Scene (Code Example)

Once your TinyShade scene is complete, baking it into a distributable artifact is a **single call**.

#### Default Runner 

```ts
import { TinyShadeBake } from "./TinyShadeBake";

// Exports a fully self-contained HTML demo
await TinyShadeBake.downloadSelfContained(
    app,
    "release_demo.html"
);

```

This produces:

-   One `.html` file    
-   No external assets    
-   No runtime dependencies    
-   Ready-to-share output
    

#### Custom Runner Injection

For advanced use cases (instrumentation, alternate timing, profiling, future audio sync), you may inject a **custom TinyShadeRunner implementation**.

```ts
import { TinyShadeBake } from "./TinyShadeBake";
import { TinyShadeRunner } from "./TinyShadeRunner";

// Stringify a custom runner implementation
const customRunnerSource = TinyShadeRunner.toString();

await TinyShadeBake.downloadSelfContained(
    app,
    "release_demo.html",
    customRunnerSource
);

```

> The runner source is embedded directly into the baked payload and instantiated at runtime.  
> This allows **full control over execution** while keeping the original scene untouched.


## 🏃 TinyShadeRunner — Runtime Scene Executor

**TinyShadeRunner** is the **minimal WebGPU runtime** responsible for executing a baked TinyShade scene.

It does **not** construct shader graphs —  
it _replays_ them.

At a high level, **Runner turns data back into execution**.

### Execution Model

Every frame:

```text
Uniform Update
↓
Compute Passes (in order)
↓
Fragment Passes (with feedback)
↓
Main Pass → Canvas` 
```
No branching.  
No scheduling logic.  
No graph evaluation.

The runner assumes the graph is **already correct**.

### Key Design Goals

-   **Zero authoring complexity**
-   **Deterministic playback**
-   **Minimal runtime surface**
-   **No dependency on TinyShade itself**
- 
This separation allows TinyShade to remain a **creative tool**, while TinyShadeRunner becomes a **tiny, embeddable player**.

## 🔁 Bake + Run: The Complete Lifecycle

```text
`TinyShade (Authoring)
        ↓
TinyShadeBake (Freeze & Pack)
        ↓
TinyShadeRunner (Replay & Execute)` 
```
This split enables:

-   Live coding → frozen artifacts    
-   Large authoring API → tiny runtime    
-   Creative iteration → production delivery    

Audio support is intentionally omitted from the current runner, as synchronization strategies are **highly production-dependent** and will be introduced in a future release.

---


## Scripts overview

| Command                   | Action               | Description |
|---------------------------|----------------------|-------------|
| `npm run build`           | `tsc`                | Runs the TypeScript Compiler to convert `.ts` files into `.js` based on your `tsconfig.json`. |
| `npm run prepublishOnly`  | `npm run build`      | A lifecycle hook that ensures your code is compiled before running `npm publish`, preventing uncompiled or broken releases. |
| `npm run start`           | `webpack serve ...`  | Launches a local development server (typically at `localhost:8080`) with live reloading and unoptimized code for debugging. |
| `npm run start-prod`      | `webpack serve ...`  | Similar to `start`, but simulates a production environment with minification and optimized assets. |
| `npm run build-examples`  | `webpack ...`        | Runs a one-time production build of the project/examples, outputting static files (usually to `dist/`). |
| `npm run wgsl:minify`     | `node scripts/...`   | Custom utility script that minifies WGSL (WebGPU Shading Language) files to reduce size or obfuscate shader code. |


### ⚡ The WGSL Shrinker (Utility Overview)
The `wgsl:minify script` is a specialized build-step utility designed for WebGPU workflows.

Recursive Processing: It scans the `src/` directory for any .wgsl files, including those nested deep in subfolders.

Clean & Compress: It strips out single-line (//) and multi-line (/* */) comments and collapses redundant whitespace into a single space. 

Artifact Creation: For every source.wgsl, it generates a source.min.wgsl.

>Purpose: This reduces the final "Bake" payload size (essential for the PNG-encoded self-contained demos) and provides a basic layer of code obfuscation for shared shaders.

## 🥂 Special Thanks & Credits
TinyShade stands on the shoulders of giants in the creative coding community:

**Mårten Rånge**: Huge thanks for the "[Introduction to Path Tracers](https://github.com/MagnusThor/so-you-think-you-can-code-2025/blob/main/day08/readme.md)" article featured in the SYTYCC 2025 Advent Calendar. The logic for the path-tracing examples in this repo is ported directly from his masterful WGSL/WebGPU implementation.

**PCrush**: For the [GPUSynth architecture](https://github.com/MagnusThor/so-you-think-you-can-code-2025/blob/main/day04/readme.md). TinyShade’s audio integration and internal DSP logic are heavily inspired by and adapted from his work on GPU-based sound synthesis.

---    


That is an ambitious and logical next step. Moving from a **linear chain** to a **Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)** will allow for much higher performance, as independent passes (like two different post-process filters or parallel simulation steps) can be dispatched to the GPU simultaneously or packed into the same command buffer more efficiently.

---

That sounds like a perfect, intuitive "low-friction" design. By making the dependency implicit (all prior passes) but allow for explicit overrides with `.dependsOn()`, you provide the power of a full Graph without forcing the user to map every single edge for simple projects.

---

## 🗺️ Roadmap: v2 Semi-Graph & Live-Editor Ecosystem
I'm  currently architecting the next evolution of TinyShade, moving from a linear execution chain to a **Programmatically Defined Semi-Graph**.

### 1. Parallel Pass Execution (The "Smart-DAG")

TinyShade v2 will treat your pipeline as a **Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)**. To keep the API minimalist, we follow a "Convention over Configuration" approach:

* **Implicit Dependency (The Default):** If you don't specify anything, a pass automatically depends on **all prior passes** in the chain. This maintains the current linear "Stack" behavior.
* **Explicit Dependency (`.dependsOn()`):** You can break the linear chain to create parallel branches.

```ts
// Example of Parallel Execution v2
const simA = app.addCompute("physics", shaderA);
const simB = app.addCompute("fluid", shaderB);

// simB does NOT wait for simA; they run in parallel on the GPU
simB.dependsOn([]); 

// Final pass waits for both parallel branches
app.main(mainShader).dependsOn([simA, simB]);

```

### 2. Why this matters for Performance

By defining independent branches, TinyShade can:

* **Merge Command Encoders:** Group parallel tasks into a single submission, significantly reducing CPU-to-GPU overhead.
* **Overlap Compute & Fragment:** If a fragment pass doesn't depend on a concurrent compute pass, the GPU can overlap their execution (Asynchronous Compute), filling more of the GPU's hardware units simultaneously.

### 3. 🛰️ TinyShade Satellite (Live-Editor Plugin)

A dedicated "Sidecar" application that hooks into the TinyShade Graph via HMR.

* **Live Node Editing:** Click any node in the graph (Compute, Fragment, or Atomic) and edit its WGSL code. The Satellite app hot-swaps the pipeline without losing the current GPU state.
* **Visual Debugging:** Tap into the graph to see a real-time preview of intermediate textures—perfect for debugging multi-pass "Atomic Splatting" or complex feedback loops.
* **State Locking:** Change logic while the simulation is running; the buffers and textures stay intact, allowing you to see the effect of your code changes on live data.

---

## ⚡ Technical Architecture ( as is )

* **Atomic Pass Orchestration:** Sequential state machine logic with zero-latency Compute-to-Render handover.
* **Recursive Temporal Buffers:** Automatic Ping-Ponging via `prev_<name>` injections.
* **Adaptive Dispatch:** Workgroup topology calculated based on hardware limits.
* **Sample-Locked Sync:** `IAudioPlugin` support for phase-perfect GPU Music.
* **Vertex-less Geometry:** Triangle-index math for full-screen rendering without vertex buffers.

---

*Magnus Thor - December 2025*
